# Stanisław Lem would be proud
## Review of the _Southern Reach_ Trilogy by _Jeff VanderMeer_

A great weakness of most science fiction stories is that, contrary to all apparent fantasy, they are soberingly conventionally knitted on closer inspection. Extraterrestrial races, alien worlds and advanced technologies are in most cases nothing more than an extrapolation of the wealth of human knowledge and experience at the time of their appearance. "_Real_" science fiction might only be understandable to the reader to a certain degree, because foreign life forms from other planets might have taken such a different path in their development, that not only their appearance would be strange. Would it be possible, for example, that somewhere there exists a kind of extraterrestrial culture that does not know any individuals, as we do, but is evolutionarily based on a kind of slime mold [that has 720 different sexes](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2019/oct/17/the-blob-zoo-unveils-baffling-new-organism-with-720-sexes)? And even this train of thought is actually much too conventional, because I too take an earthly concept as a basis, like the slime mold, that for us humans, while it may be the epitome of the alien, is nevertheless an absolutely earthly approach. How should communication with such a civilization look like? How should a consensus in understanding be reached?

One author who recognized this problem was the Polish author _Stanisław Lem_. His stories, which go far beyond the scope of conventional science fiction, are full of failed understanding and the pure powerlessness of the human mind in grasping _truly_ strange forms of existence. And throughout his life Lem smiled at science fiction like the one described above because it is nothing more than a vehicle for completely earthly stories.

Another person obviously attracted by this problem is the American author _Jeff VanderMeer_. I just recently finished his award-winning _Southern Reach_ trilogy. Let's be honest: my opinion on this series is divided. However, my attitude towards the genre of science fiction largely coincides with that of Stanisław Lem - so the Southern Reach series was probably exactly what I deserved to read.

### Overview

The Southern Reach Trilogy, consisting of the books _Extinction_, _Authority_ and _Acceptance_, is about an area of unknown size, unknown location, somewhere in North America that is strangely cut off from the outside world, and in which nature recovers what man had took possession of there. _Area X_. Sourthern Reach is the name of an agency entrusted with the investigation of Area X, whose existence is kept secret from the rest of the world. There are no people living in Area X, but Southern Reach sends expeditions to the area again and again, many of which are swallowed by Area X without a trace, some except for a few participants. Participants who make it back are often not the same, have their normal memories, follow their everyday lives and yet are somehow _changed_. And the nature that recaptures Area X doesn't seem to be what it pretends to be either...

So far to the framework of the plot. What could become the basis for an incredibly American story, with heroic penetration into enemy terrain and arduous battles against an unknown enemy, turns out to be an extremely calm story whose tension and special horror unfolds through other elements. In book one, _Extinction_, we accompany an expedition inside Area X, whose members are powerless against the influence Area X exerts on their thinking and acting. It seeps into the mind and leads into a whirlpool of all too human distrust and bizarre discoveries deep into Area X. Book two, _Authority_, leads to Southern Reach, where a group of scientists have been facing the impossible task of exploring the essence of Area X for years. But the superficially natural appearance of Area X, behind which opens an abyss of the strangest discoveries and events, nips this effort in the bud. I won't say anything about book three, _Acceptance_, as it would reveal far too much about the course of the two previous books.

### Critique

The strength of the books is, by far, the plot in Area X. Point. Be it the description of the surrounding nature, which looks so much healthier than the one in the surrounding world and yet, in a hard to describe way, is _different_, in an irritating way downright threatening. Be it the hints of what lurks hidden there - always just outside the perception of the protagonists, a shadow at the edge of the field of vision, a flash in the sky, a schema under the surface of the water. Be it the dark premonitions and the delusions that seep into the heads of the actors, noticeable only through subtle changes in the language with which they describe the events.

By the way, I have rarely experienced such a successful linguistic form in a science fiction work. Sometimes overloaded with symbolisms and nebulous paraphrases, sometimes serene pragmatic, sometimes personally addressing (written in the second person singular), each character has its own way of expression. However, the characters are somewhat unapproachable through the bench, always "at arm's length distance". Looking back, it's hard for me to say why; each character has its own prehistory, which involves him in the events around Area X, but some actions would have been absolutely in need of explanation and yet remain uncommented at all. Which brings me to the next point: if you're looking for explanations for the events, you won't find anything here. After completing the series, there are some answers, but the reader is not given any explanation of what is an absolute strength of the series in some places and its greatest weakness in others. For example, despite all its unconventionality, a dubious government agency called _Central_ should not be missing. It directs the research to Area X by its influence and conducts inhumane experiments on expedition members - the role of this institution in the creation of Area X or the meaning and purpose of the experiments remain in the dark.

### Result

The "_human part_" of the story has been put at a disadvantage in many ways. Many questions remain unanswered, the background to many actions and incidents in the dark. Fortunately, we learn a little more about Area X, but this knowledge is not tied to our noses. Many basic characteristics of the nature of Area X remain completely incomprehensible, as I described in the introduction to "good science fiction". All the more interesting are the attempts of the characters to fathom the essence of Area X, which are basically doomed to failure.

Sometimes I was absolutely captivated by the story, sometimes I wanted certain sections to just end. Still, it was an interesting experience to read this series of books. I have the feeling of having emerged _strengthened_ in some way from the maelstrom of symbolism and struggle with the personalities of some unapproachable characters. If you are looking for "_entertaining_" science fiction, You have come to the wrong place. But if you are willing to get involved with a book that demands a certain commitment from the reader, that requires you to simply want to read some sections and not do this for pure "fun at pleasure", you will be rewarded here. Stanisław Lem would certainly be proud of this offspring of modern literature, which shows that science fiction can also work completely differently. An interesting experience far away from the "superficial mainstream".
